Process and Instrumentation Design Project 
2026 
Contributes 20% to the final mark for the unit 
To be submitted to the LMS by 11:59 pm Wednesday 
13th May 2026 
“Scientists study the world as it is; engineers create the world that has never been, " Theodore 
van Kérmén — Aerospace engineer and physicist. 
“As engineers, we were going to be in a position to change the world — not just study it,” 
Henry Petroski — Engineer. 
“Engineering is the application of science for human benefit.” — J. M. Prausnitz — Chemical 
Engineer. 
“We are continually faced by great opportunities brilliantly disquised as insoluble problems,” 
Lee Tacocca — Engineer and Automobile Executive. 
Why learn to work in groups? 
The following is an extract from the report titled “ENGINEERING FUTURES 2035: A scoping 
study™! 
The AICD view is that specialists will be working increasingly in cross-functional 
teams and higher order soft skills such as empathy, professional ethics and emo- 
tional judgment are likely to be increasingly valued. This view is reinforced in the 
2018 report from The Association of Independent Schools in NSW which analy- 
ses interviews held with 15 CEOs, managing directors and leaders to explore the 
CEO’s views on how technology-driven disruption and associated economic and so- 
cietal changes were affecting their organisations now, anticipated future impacts, 
and what this might mean for education. Many of the global trends identified by 
other reports were also cited by the CEOs from a range of organisations in Australia 
who were interviewed for this report, some of whom say: 
‘Pure technical ability will no longer be sufficient; creative and interpersonal skills 
will be required even in domains which were once predominantly technical’ 
Domain expertise will still be valued, although demands for specific skills are likely 
to fluctuate and changing skills requirements will lead to greater diversity in the 
workplace. The rapid pace of change means that some skills will go out of date 
quickly. Continuing lifelong learning will be essential. Adaptability, flexibility and 
Peter L Lee, Chair, Steering Committee, ENGINEERING FUTURES 2035: A scoping study, Australian 
Academy of Engineering Deans, 2019.

resilience will be increasingly important. Those working in start-ups and small 
companies in particular will be: 
‘asked to do things they have no experience in and that things can — and will - 
change dramatically from day to day’ 
Assessed outcomes 
Ability to find and discriminate information from data bases, such as libraries, technical 
and academic articles and the internet, relevant to the questions 
Ability to write concisely, clearly and logically 
Ability to interpret and put information together in a logical way, and to understand the 
implications. 
Ability to work in a team to achieve a common goal 
Ability to work to international standards 
Ability to write readable and maintainable programs for PLCs 
Background 
A manufacturer produces two types of products: A red container containing Fluid A, a 
viscous fluid, and blue container, also a viscous fluid, containing Fluid B. 
The structure of the factory is that each step of the process is performed by a work-cell. 
Robot arms move the output of one cell to the next cell in the sequence under a command 
from the next cell. 
The batch process consists of a cell that produces empty red containers, a cell that 
produces empty blue containers, a cell that fills the containers depending on the colour 
of the container with the appropriate fluid and a cell that seals the containers with a 
common lid. 
The filling cell is supplied with containers by a robot which places a container on the 
conveyor belt of the filling station. 
A separate robot collects the filled containers at the end of the filling station’s conveyor 
belt. 
The manufacturer uses the PackML standard in the factory. 
You have been contracted to write the program to control the filling work cell. The 
program must comply with the full PackML standard. 
The customer has fitted an acoustic level sensor (High when Full), proximity sensor for 
the container at the input. (High when a container is present), and separate solenoids 
that operate the filling of fluid A and fluid B (High opens the filling injector).

« The cell has a conveyor belt to move the container to the appropriate filling location and 
to shift it to the region where the robot arm picks up the container for the next cell. (The 
conveyor belt is turned on with a High signal.) 
« Not all of the necessary items have been included and you are free to add sensors and 
drivers as you see fit. 
« You should also consider fault situations and what should be done about them. That is 
what triggers an Abort or Stop etc 
Deliverables 
The following deliverables are required: 
1. State diagram of the PackML (ANSI/ISA TR88.02-2015) structure: 
2. A Structured Text program written on the CODESYS platform for each state of the 
PackML structure. The execute state is where your program for the filling of the con- 
tainers resides; 
3. A Sequential Function Chart written on the CODESYS platform representing the PackML 
structure using the structured text programs of each state in each step; 
4. A Visualization written on the CODESYS platform to demonstrate that the program 
functions correctly. The Visualization should have lamps to indicate the current state of 
the operation. It should also have indicators for the filler, conveyor, proximity switch, 
injector and container level; 
5. A table of the input devices giving the address (variable name), acronym and description 
of each input device;

6. A table of the output devices giving the address (variable name), acronym and description 
of each output device; 
7. Description of the operation of each state (Stop, Execute, etc) with respect to PackML 
standard and how it operates in the context of the filling of the containers; 
8. The weekly group diary of the meetings indicating who attended, meeting date, start 
time and finish time, a discussion of the quality of the contribution of the tasks allocated 
at the last meeting, tasks allocated to each member to be completed by the next meeting. 
It is recommended that a different person complete the diary each week. The completed 
diary over all the weeks will be used to resolve any conflicts that arise and consequently 
every member of the group must receive a copy of the current week’s diary entry and this 
should be ratified at the next meeting; 
9. The completion of each of the Feedback Fruit surveys by the specified dates. These 
surveys will be used to determine individual’s contribution to the assignment and will be 
used to calculate the individual’s mark for the assignment once the group’s assignment 
mark has been determined; 
10. The assignment, including an image of the CODESYS program must be uploaded to the 
LMS; 
11. A USB drive (which can be collected after the assignment has been marked) that contains 
the program in a form where it can be used to run the program using CODESYS. 
Notes: 
1. Installation 
« You may use as few or as many instruments as you like, as well as others if the types 
of instruments listed are not adequate for your chosen control philosophy; 
« For any instrumentation that requires specific dimensional information (i.e. pipe 
diameter for a flow meter etc) state your chosen dimensions, using information where 
available or make an assumption and describe why you chose that value; 
« Assume mounting points are available for all instruments at the points you want to 
put them in the process; 
o Assume 240VAC and 24VDC power supplies are available wherever needed; 
« It is not necessary to establish a communications protocol or use pack.tags 
2. Groups 
« You have been allocated to a group to work on this assignment. You cannot change 
the membership of the group. 
o Attendance at group meetings is compulsory. A penalty of 10% will apply to any 
individual who misses more than one meeting without sufficient cause verified by 
the School Student Office in the form of Special Consideration 
« The purpose of the group is to assist the individual in finding relevant, quality sources 
of information and through discussion among the group come to an understanding 
and agreement on how to complete the assignment.

« The group is responsible for including all members of the group in the meetings. 
This means that all members must be contacted and a communication method 
established. A time and place must be determined so that all members can attend 
meetings. 
+ Warning: If a member allocated to a group is not included in communications, 
then unless there is a satisfactory reason (this needs to be confirmed by the unit- 
coordinator), all members of the group will be penalised 10%. 
« You are expected to meet weekly and keep a group diary from the time that the 
assignment has been allocated. 
« The expected average weekly effort on this assignment is 5 hours each person. This 
includes the time for meetings and discussion, literature search and information 
assimilation. 
« You can meet using any form of communication you prefer: F2F, Wechat, Line, 
Teams, Zoom etc. 
3. References 
« All sources must be declared using the IEEE format for referencing and must be in 
the english language. Referring to information from the internet requires the url and 
access date. Referring to the lecture notes is not appropriate for this assessment. 
4. The report 
« The quality of the writing is expected to be at a high standard, showing both a 
command of english (spelling, punctuation and vocabulary) and an understanding 
of the technical language appropriate to the field. 
« All material appearing in the report that is not the group’s original work must be 
appropriately referenced and a consistent citation style must be used throughout 
the document. 
o The report will be judged on the following criteria: 
— Clarity & conciseness of the explanations and diagrams; 
— Use & relevance of theories & frameworks; 
— Insight & synthesis of the information collected; 
— Use of sound logical argument 
« The program will be judged on the following items 
— Ability to easily understand the function of the program 
— The ease of changing the program in the event of customer changes 
— Readability of the program 
— The overall operation of the program 
5. Feedback-fruits The performance feedback software Feedback-fruits will be used to moni- 
tor issues within a group and to make adjustments of the Group Marks to the Individual 
Marks. There will be 3 surveys through out the semester. The last survey due at the time 
of submission of the assignment is the main tool used to make adjustments. However, 
any adjustments require that there is a consistent message coming from all 3 surveys.
